In Medieval time, the church and the convent of San Benedetto were in a peripheral position, although located along the most important road axis of the city. The monastic complex (today we can appreciate the church, the bell tower and the cloister) was erected on the remains of the church of Santa Maria Veterana, between the end of the 11th and the early 12th centuries, under the auspices of the Norman feudatories. In 1097, in 1107 and in the following years, the acts of donation of the fief of Vallarano and Tuturano were recorded. The donors were the Count of Conversano, Goffredo, and his wife, Sichelgaita, lords of Brindisi, who donated the fief to the monastery.  In the 18th century, the old monastery was abandoned for the construction of the new one to the west of the old building, thus dismantling the portal from the façade and rebuilding it on the right facade. 
Because of the laws about the suppression of ecclesiastical goods in 1867, nuns had to abandon the monastery and the church was handed to the archbishop to become a parish The portal presents wicker weaves with Lombard and Byzantine influences. The lintel is structured in a classic frame, rigid acanthus leaves with a monumental protruding, with three hunting scenes inside, depicted in very low relief.
It is dated between the end of the 11th century and the beginning of the next one. The eastern origin, Sassanid, of the iconography is well identifiable: three hunters in longboard (probably) costumes and armed with spears pierce a dragon in the central panel and a lion in the lateral ones.
On the portal is the coat of arms of Archbishop Antonino Sersale (1743-1750), who realized many restoration works, not only in San Benedetto church.
The interior is divided into three aisles and four spans of grey marble columns: the centre is covered with cross vaults domed by massive ribs, the side ones by half-barrels that are set at the same height as the central vault, contrasting the push, all surmounted by precious capitals. Four capitals are Corinthian and the one placed on the first left column presents the typical pre-Roman taste, representing oxen, lions and rams with jointed heads.
The organic set of vaults, cross vaults and transverse arches, a unicum in the architectural landscape of the region, replaces the system dome in axis, a more dynamic solution adopted in Puglia but also used in the 11th century in Lombardia and Northern Europe. In the church, in addition to some pieces of floral decoration, the right wall offers a delicate fragment of a 19th-century fresco representing a Madonna with the Child with a haloed and beaded head and gently flexed.
The brown maphorion of the Virgin, under which the light veil that covers her hair shines, frames the face and its features: a slightly aquiline nose, big and sweet almond-shaped eyes, a small mouth on a round chin. In the Presbyterian area, there are a Crucifixion and an Announcement, enclosed in a flat-bottomed and cush-shaped alcove. In the church, there are the precious canvases of the Assumption of the Virgin, with “late-manneristic characters” and the Adoration of the Shepherds (1570) by Jacopo De Vanis. In the cloister pieces of frescoes are still visible. Next to the acephalous image of a holy monk, wearing habit and hood and holding a closed roll in his right hand, there is an Announcement, with the Virgin unusually engaged in sewing work. It is visible a needle, gently hold by her thin fingers. The cloister is surrounded by a covered passage with windows, divided by little columns of greek marble and crutch capitals with zoomorphic motifs (winged lions, rams, oxen) and other palmatiform.
