Today, all the architectural structure of the convent of San Paolo is entirely walkable, although deeply modified, within the palace of the Province. In fact, there are a lot of findings of the outcrops of the ancient 13th-century and 18th-century structure, such as the single and twin lancet windows present on the southern side of the church.
The State Archive of Naples preserves a notary act about its foundation, dated 2nd March 1284, in which King Charles I of Angiò granted the Mint’s area to the Franciscan Fathers for the construction of their convent and church (completed in 1322). 
A historian from Brindisi, Andrea Della Monaca, reports that the foundation date was carved on one of the beams, near the main gate.
According to the Franciscan idea, the church has a single aisle, slender abs, wide walls, originally covered with frescoes with theories of saints and scenes of Christian piety, furrowed by long and narrow windows. Little traces of the ancient structure remain, due to the renovation needed because of the evolution of taste and necessity, including the overlap of the baroque altars in local stone or the parietal frescoes (“L’albero della Croce”, “Santi” and “Madonna with the Child” on the walls of the choir, the Works of Mercy, Santi, Stories of Santa Maria Maddalena, Courteous scenes, Santo Stefano, on the southern wall), and in the early 16th century the replacement of the original ceiling in “painted lilies”, only few traces still visible, with the current trussed cover. 
Due to the pressing threats of collapse between 1825 and 1826, the façade was set back eight metres with the removal of the first span and the removal of two altars. The portal is topped with a pointed prothyrum, the lintel and the archivolt present classic vegetable decorations.
In 1809 the convent was abolished and in 1813 used as a royal gendarmerie and detention house. After the restoration in 1828, Mons. Pietro Consiglio, archbishop of Brindisi (1826-1839), ceded the structure to the confraternity of the Immaculate. 
On the inner south side of the church, there is a Gothic niche decorated with a fresco depicting the Virgin and San Giovanni under the Cross (only some fragments are still visible on a dark background) and in the respective points, there are two angels in flight who hold a circle.
The altars dedicated to San Giuseppe from Copertino, Sant’Antonio from Padova (1632), Santa Maria (1603), the Holy Crucifix, the Immaculate (1741), the Saints Vito, Modesto and Crescenza. The latter altar was realized by sculptors from Lecce, Agostino De Matteis and Pietro Spongano. There are the canvases of Madonna del Carmine with the saints Caterina, Paolo hermit, Diego, attributed to Alessandro Fracanzano, the one depicting the Perez Noguerol family, painted in 1603, The Immaculate Conception, the Transit of San Giuseppe and the Announcement, of the Madonna della Concordia of the early 17th century, the Visitation of 1559, the autographed work of the painter Jacopo de Vanis from Brindisi, placed on the altar demolished in 1900 to build a pulpit, than eliminated with the restoration in 1964. In the chapel of San Francesco is the burial monument of 1699 of Obbedienzo Vavotico, wanted by Giovanni Maria Moricino (1558-1628), a historian from Brindisi. In the church, there is also a macenula, a statue of the Immaculate Virgin dressed during the year with four dresses, enriched with precious embroidery. The statue is also called Madonna of the Earthquake because she saved the city of Brindisi from the earthquake on 20th February 1743.
