The first stone of the Cathedral of Brindisi, also known as the church of San Giovanni Battista, was laid by Pope Urban II in 1089. According to tradition, San Leucio, following the instructions listened in a dream, left Alexandria to go to Brindisi to free the city from heretics. The Saint built the Cathedral on the place where he baptized 27000 converts. In the past, in the same area, there was an ancient pagan temple dedicated to the Sun and to the Moon. 
The first testimonies of the origins of the Cathedral of Brindisi are from the 12th century: two epigraphs on marble slabs walled in the sacristy, refer to the Norman Ruggero il Guiscardo, son of Tancredi, and to the Archbishop Bailardo, who built the temple in 1139-1143.
Here, Ruggero was crowned King of Sicily in 1191. In November 1225, the 14 years-old Isabella di Brienne, Queen of Jerusalem, would have celebrated her wedding with Emperor Federico II, lord of the West,  in this church. In this cathedral, close to the docks of the port, the crusaders gathered in prayer before setting sail to the Holy Land. Today, the only thing that remained of the Romanesque church, is the basilica floor plan, common to the one of the coeval basilica of San Nicola in Bari, with three aisles without a transept.
On the right aisle, the Holy Sacrament opens, including the altars of Sant’Antonio from Padova and San Teodoro from Amasea. Today, on the left side aisle and around the main altar are visible some fragments of the mosaic floor wanted by the French Archbishop William (1173-81). These fragments represent the figure of Ascanio and some episodes of the Chanson de Roland. At the bottom of the left aisle, we can see the representation of a tree trunk and the other fragments near the main altar show zoomorphic motifs as dogs biting dogs, birds with tied necks, beasts with tails transformed into fierce heads and birds paired with intertwined necks.
The central apse was demolished at the end of 1582 to give rise to the magnificent wooden choir of the canons, commissioned by Archbishop Andrea de Ajardi. The tile of San Giorgio and the dragon, with a glimpse of the 16th century Brindisi, and the one of San Teodoro who, in the guise of a Spanish knight, pierces the devil and in the background is the sea with a sailship and the ancient towers at the entrance to the port of Brindisi. 
On the right, there is the Chapel of the SS Sacramento, built in 1500 and restored after 1743 earthquake, with two votive oratories on the sides, the right one dedicated to San Teodoro and the other to Sant’Antonio from Padova.
The canvases kept inside the Cathedral are: The Saint on horseback by Filippo Palizzi (1840), with a view of the port of Brindisi in the background, The Martyrdom of San Teodoro, San Teodoro before the judges, The Last Supper, Solomon and the Queen of Saba, Sant’Antonio with the child, Resurrection of a dead man, Preaching of San Leucio, The Martyr of San Pelino, San Giuseppe with the Child by Diego Oronzo Bianco (1683-1767). There are also other canvases as Sant’Andrea and SS Ignazio and Francesco Saverio by Serafino Elmo, the Baptism of Christ by an unknown local painter (perhaps Serafino Elmo), The Pity by Giovanni Scatigno (1750), the Transit of San Giuseppe, the Miracle of Soriano, The Communion of San Girolamo heremit by an unknown local painter of the 18th century, the Death of Sant’Anna by Domenico Viola (1682), the Visitation by Niccolò Perillo (1750). On the left, there is the baptismal font, wanted by Archbishop Bernardino de Figueroa (1571-86) made with Lecce stone with the tank adorned with four cherubs, which rests on support decorated by the motif of the dolphin, symbol of Christ.
