In 1659 the archbishop of Brindisi Francesco de Estrada (1659-1671) bought with his own money both the church of San Michele Arcangelo and the adjacent dormitory consisting of four cells, owned by the Celestine monks of Mesagne since 1616 when the house of Brindisi was closed. It was bought to host the Piarist Fathers.
The first aim was to be able to fill, at least in the town, the gaps in public education that in the 17th century seemed almost completely non-existent. In fact, the news about the education in Brindisi refers only of a certain master, Antonio Diana, who taught human Letters in the 16th century.
At the beginning of the Scuole Pie, we could count only three classes of pupils, but later they became two hundred.
The architectural complex was enlarged thanks to several donations by the Portuguese Giovanni Nunnes della Torre (1680), royal Portolan, and Girolamo Lettera (1684). On 13 February 1807, following the Napoleonic suppressions, the convent was abandoned by the fathers, thus becoming the property of the municipal administration of Brindisi and in 1873 it was used as a prison first and successively as a school. Since 1875 it hosted the Conscript Council. During the twentieth century, it became an orphanage (1912) and later, in 1923, it was used as the headquarters of the Croce Bianca and of the Guardie Campestri. The church of San Michele Arcangelo is known for its distinctive polychrome tile dome, a conspicuous reference from multiple points of view of the old town.
The sober façade presents a central portal topped with a triangular tympanum that shows the coat of arms of the order of the Mother of God of the Scuole Pie. In the interior, the single-aisle hall ends with a transept There are side chapels that have been deprived of their altars and sacred furnishings.
Baroque decorations were realized by the master plasterer Maurizio D'Alessio, from Naples, who worked on the chapel of the main altar dedicated to San Michele Arcangelo, the dome, the side chapels, the columns and both internal and external arches starting from 1718 and for the following three years.
