The church of the Holy Trinity or Santa Lucia was built in the 13th century and it is a typical example of the Romanesque architecture that opens to the Gothic language. It has a crypt and originally it was connected to a female monastery, probably inhabited by nuns as reported in a 1248 document. The church seems to be divided into two parts but actually, it is a single architectural complex consisting of a crypt and an upper hall. The latter has a pointed façade and the preexisting staircase, similar to the San Paolo Eremita’s one, has been removed and replaced with the current two-ramp and central gallery. The interior was extensively modified in the 17th century with the realization of the low arches that divide the three aisles and the addition of the side altars. In 1774, there were three of them with the dedication to Santa Maria della Croce, the Santa Trinità and Santa Lucia. In 1770, Giovanni Scatigno realized the canvas of the Martyrdom of Santa Lucia, destined to be placed on the altar of the saint. After the demolition of the church of Santa Maria del ponte, the newly renovated Madonna del Dolce Canto polyptych and the wooden crucifix were moved to the church. In 1858, the altar of Madonna del Dolce Canto replaced that of Madonna della Croce. The 13th-century crypt is of great interest, divided into three small 4-columns aisles with Corinthian order capitals that could have been realized by the Bottega del Tempio, a team of sculptors who moved from Palestine to the West in the 12th century. They were active also in other areas of Puglia, such as Barletta and Foggia.
The frescoes on the walls dated between the 13th and 14th centuries; among these, there are those of San Nicola, Maddalena, San Pietro Apostolo and the Vergine Kyriotissa, that is the Mother of Good in Majesty. According to the usual iconography, San Nicola is depicted full-length in bishop’s dress. The Saint raises his blessing right hand in the Greek way and holds with his left hand the book from the plate decorated with a cross and four spheres. The painting is comparable to Byzantine miniatures because of the rich and melted complexion. In the second fresco, San Pietro is depicted on a dark blue background. He holds the keys with the right hand and with the other one he blesses in the Greek way. In one of the two large niches that open on the west wall, is Madonna Kyriotissa, depicted in a red frame on a yellow and blue background. She sits on a throne holding the child on her knees. In the adjacent niche is Maddalena mirrofora, with long hair in strands, attributable to the author of the Santa orante, that is on the right side of the niche itself.
