Santa Teresa church was completed in 1697 by Giuseppe Zimbalo and it is a typical example of Baroque architecture, with its façade rich in pilasters, capitals, volutes and pinnacles.
The church that today hosts the Diocesan Museum, was commissioned by the canon Francesco Monetta in 1671 with the intent to dedicate to the order of the Discalced Carmelite.
It presents some references to the Salento Baroque culture and it is characterized by a splendid façade divided into three orders on which two pinnacles connected by two elegant volutes stand out.
The interior presents a Latin cross that preserves the ancient local devotional testimonies: the chapel dedicated to the Santi Medici which consists of five papier-mache statues of the saints and a significant collection of votive offerings.
The adjacent convent dedicated to Santi Gioacchino ed Andrea stands out for its large cloister that currently hosts the State Archives. It was abandoned by the Carmelite Fathers after the suppression of ecclesiastical goods and orders in 1807. 
The interior shows a single aisle with transept with small side chapels where valuable painting on canvas from the 17th and 18th centuries can be admired, such as “Sant’Andrea” on the first altar on the left (at the bottom there is the Aragonese castle), “Educazione di Maria Vergine” (by Francesco Saverio Altobello) on the front door, the “Gloria di Santa Teresa” and those ones that adorn the ceiling.
The macenula of Madonna del Carmine is really interesting, as the papier-mache statues of the Santi Medici; a confraternity dedicated its cult to these saints until 1971
In the chapel of Madonna del Carmelo, there is an epigraph which recalls Aloysio Ferreyra, castellan of the island from 1690 to 1710, who established the Monte of Giannizzeri, an institution that was active until 1940 and supported financially Spanish women and soldiers.
The façade is enriched by pilasters, capitals, volutes and pinnacles. The portal, surmounted by an architrave, is flanked by four niches with embossed frames adorned with floral motifs. The hall shows the original late 17th-century plant as the subsequent interventions have only partially modified it.
Among the furnishings of the late 1600s, there are the austere wooden choir of the presbytery, probably by carvers from the last quarter of the century, the smooth pilasters with Corinthian capitals, the little volutes and the mix linear mirrors that decorate the stalls.
The decorations in stucco are the result of the 18th-century interventions: winged heads, angels, volutes, festoons with flowers and fruits, inlaid polychrome marbles altars renovated in the 18th century along with the stuccoes and paintings. After the restoration work, the church houses in its rooms the Diocesan Museum “Giovanni Tarantini”.
