Santa Maria degli Angeli church is a city sanctuary wanted by Giulio Cesare Russo, a capuchin named Padre Lorenzo from Brindisi, beatified in 1783 by Pio VI, canonized in 1881 by Leone XII and proclaimed doctor of the universal church with the apostolic doctor in 1959 by Giovanni XXIII.
On that site, in the neighbourhood of St. Martin, there was the house where he was born on July 22, 1559.
He left  Brindisi in 1573, then, Lorenzo returned here in 1604, for a few days, when he considered the opportunity to build a capuchin church.
Initially, the building was thought to be with the facade facing the west, on the current via San Lorenzo, but then in the process, following a project from Munich, the entire building was oriented to the north and reused the primitive aisle in the area of the transept.
The façade of the church, divided into two floors connected by volutes, is crowned with a tympanum with an interrupted apex. On the lower floor, separated by lesene, there is a rectangular entrance carved in white stone and closed by a wooden door of the seventeenth century with bas-relief representations of San Francesco from Assisi, Santa Chiara, the <Saints Evangelists Giovanni e Matteo. 
Above the portal is the coat of arms of the Dukes of Lorraine who were among the main founders of this Laurentian initiative. 
On the cornice, there is the second floor, delimited by two lesenes with Corinthian capitals, decorated in the centre by a large window with an image on glass of San Lorenzo from Brindisi, painted by Tommaso Sardelli at the beginning of the century and topped with a broken tympanum. The façade of the first church, on Via San Lorenzo, has a triangular pediment, with two zoomorphic gargoyles at the extremes, rectangular windows delimited by a frame carved with plant-patterned high-relief, a simple rectangular portal. The interior, with a Latin cross plant, has a single aisle with deep side chapels; the first   on the right is dedicated to Sant’Anna and preserves a lacquered wooden crucifix that was translated here from Santa Maria del Casale in 1886 and attributed to Fra’ Angelo da Pietrafitta (death 1699) who should have executed it in the last years of the seventeenth century. On the altar, there is the Holy Conversation, oil on canvas performed post mortem in honour of Sister Camilla Serrati (1576-1672), on the left wall Madonna with San Francesco di Sales and Rosa, painting attributed to the local painter Barnaba Zizzi (1762-1828) and placed in the place of production of the artist between 1780 and 1790. In the next chapel of San Francesco, there is the canvas representing San Francesco in ecstasy, consoled by a musical angel, commissioned by the Athenian painter Giovanni Papagiorgio in 1641. The fourth and last one, dedicated to the Immaculate, which hosts a local artist’s canvas that can be placed chronologically in the middle of the seventeenth century, preserves a painting representing the Madonna of Milk, executed between the 16th and 17th centuries also by a local workshop. On the left, there are the chapels dedicated to San Pasquale Baylon, to San Lorenzo from Brindisi, with paintings attributed to Oronzo Tiso (a. 1726-1800), to Santa Maria Margherita Alacoque. In the latter is the Ivory Cross, sent by San Lorenzo to this church in 1615 and realized by the school of the ivory turning of Munich of Bavaria. In the transept there are four canvases: Adoration of the Shepherds, Adoration of the Magi, Circumcision, Escape to Egypt, attributed to Diego Oronzo Bianco (1683-1767) and realized in the third decade of the eighteenth century. The great scenic machine that defines the area of the liturgical celebration, flanked by the two stone statue of San Francesco from Assisi and Santa Chiara, framed by four twisted columns and partially occupied by the higher part of the main altar, in polychrome marble, can be considered realized in the second half of the 1600s. The great canvas represents the Immaculate among Angels. The coats of arms placed on the left and on the right of the main altar refer, respectively, to Massimiliano from Bavaria and the Dukes of Lorraine, financiers of the convent construction and the church. It’s worthing mentioning the 16th-century pulpit in gilded wood with representations of San Pietro and San Paolo. The canvases on the wooden ceiling show: on the aisle the Apparition in the Porziuncola, on the transept The martyrdom of Santa Orsola and her companions and the Miracle of Santa Chiara. They are part of the eighteenth-century interventions, which can also be visible in the decorations of the altar.
The monastery was taken over by Brindisi register office on 10 March 1862 and in 1914 the monastery was demolished to build the female elementary school.
